---
title: "Universal Access to Basic Finance - Q&A"
---
#### Talk at CryptoCompare Digital Asset Summit in London [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W-Y_F3PS4JE)
<!--more-->
23:19 Q: Andreas, thanks for the talk. That was very cool. You talked about private transactions and these chainalytics. Can you please explain, I mean, we have CoinJoins now, we have quite a few implementations of CoinJoins. Can you explain to us how CoinJoins will make their business model irrelevant and how they won't make any sense pretty much? Thanks.

A:
Thank you so much. CoinJoin isn't really a specific technology. It's a model for doing multi-party transactions. So in cryptocurrencies that use a transaction coin model or UTXO model like Bitcoin, and many of its variants, you can do a transaction that is a multi-party transaction. A transaction is not "from to" with a single party "from" and a single party "to". A transaction has inputs and outputs in crypto like Bitcoin. And what that means is the inputs which are each signed independently and the outputs which are each delivered independently don't have to belong to the same people. So imagine as if you write twenty blank cheques that are signed by twenty people who control that money. You put them in a big bucket and then you hand them out to various people you need to pay, and everybody can make sure that the person they wanted to be paid is paid, but eventually you can't tell who paid who or who was even participating. That's called a CoinJoin. There are a number of different technical implementations for a CoinJoin that allow parties to collaborate. The greatest largest CoinJoin happened two days ago. It had a hundred participants. So a hundred people paying in, a hundred payouts, and these kinds of things, because of the architecture of the system, fundamentally undermine the attempts of analytics. But not enough because you can still do statistical analysis on these in order to connect one of these transactions, choose the KYC endpoint of an exchange which is a big source of surveillance data, and use that to de-anonymize participants in payments. So CoinJoin isn't enough. And in fact the European Union has now said, that participating in a CoinJoin is illegal. And the other six billion don't give a shit. They've already been called illegals. They've been called illegal people. So if illegal people commit illegal acts whatever what are they gonna be: double illegal? When an act like that is the difference between you feeding your children or not, then the law is immoral itself. And I'm not encouraging people to break the law. I'm encouraging people to achieve justice by the means they have at their disposal. CoinJoin is not enough because we also need to obfuscate the amounts of payments, and that is an entire area of science called zero-knowledge proof, sum range proofs, confidential transactions where the actual value of the payment is encrypted, so you can't see how much money is being transferred which breaks the statistical analysis even further. But in order for these tools to be effective at providing people the universal privacy that we have with cash, which for thousands of years gave people the freedom to transact and apparently did not result in the end of civilization, we need to go further. We need to have these tools on by default in every wallet. And so in some countries that's going to be made illegal and those countries are going to rob their own citizens of the basic elements of financial privacy which is a human right in my opinion. But they're also going to do is remove themselves from the innovation train of this technology. You can't remove crypto from your country, but you can remove your country from crypto. And so many of our governments are trying to do exactly that. Don't worry, there's plenty of people in the world who need it, and will not pay attention to any silly law their corrupt governments pass.

27:37 Q: Firstly, thanks a lot. So if you look at the traditional financial market infrastructure and if you look at what your defining as universal basic finance, do you see the two kind of interoperable or do you see UBF as a complete replacement for the traditional markets?

A:
Well, so it depends. There are some functions that you can't replicate with crypto currencies. For example, with crypto currencies you can't do fractional reserve banking based on the unlimited printing of currency at zero interest rates flooding the markets with enormous asset bubbles. That's disappointing. I mean, how have the financial services companies going to make profit without risk or by externalizing the risk for the entirety of society? It's very disturbing. We'd better regulate that. You can't do credit in the traditional form. You have to do micro lending and micro credit which is basically not fractional. So you can only generate enough credit as other people see as investment directly. So you can't do those functions of traditional banking. But when it comes to storing currency, that function, it is unnecessary to do that function with an intermediary. Everybody can store their own currency, be monetarily sovereign, as they say in the most kind of die hard angles of crypto. You don't need an intermediary to do payments. International cross-border payments from any recipient to any recipient, that's the fundamental concept of neutrality that exists on the internet and digital currencies on the internet exhibit that same concept, that same principle of neutrality, and you can't stop it. So those functions do not exist in 25 years of the mainstream banking system and the reason they don't exist is because no banking system can offer them with the cost and more importantly with the openness of open, public, borderless cryptocurrencies. You see, we're seeing a lot of the corporations now trying to compete and the banking system really is caught between a rock and a hard place, or between a crypto system and Facecoin. Because on one end here comes crypto and it's offering an open, borderless service that you cannot, by law you cannot offer, you cannot participate in, you can't even play with that technology because you're required under the regulatory regime to KYC everyone you touch. And to do all of this reporting. You have been inadvertently, or vertently, deputized into law enforcement. Worse in the United States now, the banks have been deputized into the military. They've become direct arms of the military. They are fighting trade wars, they are fighting currency wars on behalf of the government. It's a very bad position to be in because you can't play in crypto. You are prohibited from playing in crypto. That's okay. Crypto serves a different purpose. But, on the other hand. Banks have traditionally been the greatest investors in technology and have prided themselves to be these beacons of technology and innovation. Well here comes Facebook, here comes Silicon Valley, and they're not going after crypto. They can't for exactly the same reasons the banks can't. They're regulated entities, they exist in jurisdictions. They're not open-source projects that are not controlled by anyone. Their systems that are absolutely centralized in control so therefore they will have to do all of the KYC, AML, and borders that traditional payment systems do. They cannot be open, borderless, neutral, censorship resistant, transparent, public, immutable. Because all of those things are prohibited under the money transmitter and banking regulations. Therefore they will be closed, and centralized, censorship lading, surveillance driven. And they'll do that better than the banks, faster than the banks with better interfaces than the banks, and they start out of the gate with two and a half billion customers. You are so screwed if you are in the banking industry right now. It's coming from both ends and you can't fight either side. But that's okay because change is good. It's good for consumers, it's good for people. If I was in the banking environment right now, I would be screaming to stop the train of regulation, financial surveillance and exclusion because it will bury you without stopping any of your competitors who operate in the open source, borderless environment that the internet is.

32:38 Q: Do you think more enterprises from the traditional sort of cybersecurity space will jump into this market and what do you think the impact of that will be is sort of mainstay technology companies? Not just Facebook and Facecoin, but folks like Symantec, RSA, McAfee sort of jump into this area. What do you think the impact of that will be?

A: So the traditional model of security is one on protecting concentric circles of access based on firewalls, based on access controls, based on procedural process, and operational controls. That model assumes that there is a privileged center that has access to all of the information, and then you have concentric layers which are more and more open which have less and less valuable information. The problem with that model is that the internet destroyed that model. And the reason it destroyed it is because the center has the most stale uninteresting information possible, and all of the collaboration and contents building and the great richness of our information society operates in the public sphere on the outermost circle. And worse, if you build these types of security mechanisms you end up isolating the people inside those walls and making it difficult for them to access these services. I don't know if you've ever tried from a corporate environment to access certain websites that you know are wealth of information. They have this wonderful resource that you want to download and it pops up a little message that says: "Your administrator has blocked access to this website because it contains objectionable material". Well that is the story of modern security in a nutshell, that little message right there. And this idea of turning inwards and building walls and keeping out the hoards, keeping out the barbarians of the big open public Internet, is reflected in our society. It's a medieval idea. It's a medieval idea of castle walls and the problem is that you have to open the gates every now and then to let traders and food in otherwise you starve. And in the Information Age you starve by irrelevance and lack of access to information. So traditional security companies are welcome to come into this new space of open public block chains. And what they can learn is we have a new model. And this new model is an open public platform that ensures security not by restricting access, but by collaboration through game theory, through mechanisms that have game theoretic output or outcomes based on incentives and punishments that operate through an embedded monetary system that ensures that people behave according to both self-interest and in alignment with the consensus rules. This is an incredibly powerful new security model for open access to information as well. We can use it to re-decentralize the web. We can use it to open information that needs to be open. It puts the ultimate control and responsibility over security into the hands of the individual key holders who control their own destiny and moves that data back into their hands. It is a noncustodial model for security which also means a noncustodial model for identity, and non-custodial model for your personal data. We can use this new security model to fix the web which has lost some of its original promise. But don't fret because out of the compromised surveillance laden web that we have today, out popped the black swan of Bitcoin. It's still capable of delivering surprises. It's still capable of delivering freedom in disruptive viral packages that you cannot stop. And it will do it again and again and again. And now Bitcoin has popped out another 2000 systems that emulate that model and is exploding that space of innovation. Security has also been massively disrupted by this model.

36:54 Q: Hi Anton, I'm sorry, Andreas. Thank you very much for your presentation. My question is: "In order for the universal access to finance that you're talking about to occur, it means a very sophisticated distributed architecture. Do you think that there's a risk that regulation will move from the financial rails to the technology architecture itself and what do we need to be cautious of to stop ISPs stopping software, stopping Apple having the technology on their phone, those sorts of things? I see that as a huge risk".

A: It is absolutely a huge risk. One of the first people to write about that was Lawrence Lessig, who wrote a book called "Code is law" in the 90s which was about the fact that our new information realms are defined by laws that are not legislated or voted on, but coded by software entities. And those define the rules of behavior within our information realms. Now, the interesting thing is that open block chains are also realms where code is law, but the code is actually the rules of consensus that define the law that operates in that realm. Regulation will happen at the fringes, it will happen at the on-ramps and off-ramps of all of these systems. But ultimately, you can't regulate these things out of existence. China has banned Bitcoin more than ten times. The last time very, very strongly and they really, really meant it this time. Do you think Bitcoin still operates in China? Oh hell yes, it does. They tried to shut down half the internet to prevent people from saying the magical trigger phrase which will get you knocked off the internet in China. "June 4th 1989" that's the magical phrase that will terminate your internet connection. You cannot stop the truth from propagating on communication media, and you cannot stop computing from being general-purpose computing. You cannot stop any computing from being general-purpose computing, and God knows they're trying. Governments around the world are trying to mandate encryption backdoors which don't work. And no matter how many technologies explain very, very patiently and very, very politely that you cannot give golden keys to the good guys without giving golden keys to everyone at which point the bad guys - or gals - have access to the same information. You can't persuade these intelligence agencies that keep losing our data and leaking like sieves, then they can't do a better job with security than all of the private sector has failed to do already. Two days ago it was announced that the Customs and Border Protection agents in the United States lost a hundred million photos that got leaked from the little cameras you see at the border post where they take a nice photo of your face, straight on. Really really nice well-lit photo, straight on with your eyes open, no hats, no sunglasses. The kind of thing that's kind of perfect for facial recognition. The bad guys have it now. Be prepared for a reign of terror of surveillance where watching happens bottom-up, grassroots with applications on phones, where people can track you from the background of a photo where you appear accidentally. Unregulated people, not dysregulated people like we elect all the time. They will try to make computing non-generic, so that they can control the range of expression and experience you can have on computing. It will fail because it's an armed race against much more creative, much more driven hackers around the world who have broken every layer of security anyone who's put in their path - ever - to liberate electronic devices. If you want to read more about this topic? One of my favorite authors, and speakers, and thought leaders on this, is Cory Doctorow. And you can learn a lot by understanding his premise on general-purpose computing and why the attempts by governments like the UK - primarily -, but also France and other European countries - and of course the US - to ban encryption, to control general-purpose computing not only fail, but they create the kind of totalitarian society in which the people who hold those levers of power, the ones who ask you for ID before you look at porn, and then leak all of that information all over the internet. Whoops! Those are the people who become the most dangerous people in society. Those are the new Stasi. It is really shocking to me as someone who was born in this country, to watch this country forget the very lessons that Europe learned sixty years ago, and go down that exact same path blindly, giving enormous power to elected government as if the magic of voting preserves freedoms and institutions. It doesn't.

41:57 Q: Hello. So CoinJoin I think only 4% of coins are held in UTXO's that have been obfuscated. In the last answer you mentioned that the regulations would happen on the margins on these on- and off-ramps, but now we have FED for coming trying to impose the travel rule on these on- and off-ramps and 20% of coins are held just in Xapo, Coinbase, Crack and Binance. That's not really the margins. It seems to me that there is an immediate threat of kind of a bifurcation of the network, which has been discussed for years but seems to be coming at us quite quickly. How do you think that might play out in the coming months or years?

A: Financial privacy underpins the right to freedom of expression, freedom of association, freedom of the vote, freedom of assembly. Because without those basic financial privacy rights, if everything you do can be tracked through your payments, your purchases then all of your associations, and all of your expression, and all of your acts of freedom can then be punished after the fact severely enough to deter anyone from exercising those freedoms. We've got to think about two aspects of restraints. One is a priori restraint, right, which is explicitly prohibited in for example the US Constitution, and of course in the British Constitution - oh sorry tough point there, you don't have one - and so a priori restraint is only one part of the picture because ex post facto restraint through chilling effects is just as important. We have a situation in crypto today where privacy hasn't been given sufficient importance and that's a very dangerous path. I believe that the biggest step we need to make in terms of development in Bitcoin for example, is better privacy and we see a lot of experiments happening right now including zero-knowledge proofs, sum range proofs that could lead us to higher degrees of privacy. The next few proposed improvements to the Bitcoin protocol actually involve very privacy centric improvements and I'm very glad to see that. But the other thing you've got to realize is that one of the elements of engineering that is almost always true is, you don't optimize for a problem that doesn't exist yet. And the problem here is that the erosion of privacy and the ability to do statistical analysis isn't visible to the average user. It doesn't affect them to lose their financial privacy because most of them already have financial privilege and they already have very little financial privacy and they're not being actively persecuted. All we're looking for is a couple of direct attacks against people who have lost their financial privacy that way and what you're going to see is an enormous immune response by the entire crypto space. And it will start developing privacy features faster than you can imagine. We already saw this in the peer-to-peer space with the evolution of Napster. Napster was the friendly, cuddly bearer of peer-to-peer file-sharing it was the one that wanted desperately to make a deal with the music industry. But they said no and they shut it down. So Nutella popped up and they shut it down. So LimeWire popped up and they shut it down. So BitTorrent popped up and they can't shut it down. They evolved decentralization by creating exactly the kind of hostile stimulus than a directed evolution technology that can move and mutate fast enough by the most creative and determined people who you can't hire because they're not interested in money. Win that arms race by evolving and mutating that technology until it can resist the attack. Nicolas Nassim Taleb calls these systems "anti fragile". They're systems that not only resist attack but in the process of being attack evolve strengths and become more and more robust. The internet is an anti fragile system, and open block chains are anti fragile systems. I'm not worried. We already have privacy centric block chains and those block chains are leading the path in terms of research in order to help us adopt these in a more generic way across the board. We've learned the lesson of the internet. The internet had insufficient encryption and privacy and that gave a lot of governments the opportunity to co-opt our information. Hopefully we will not repeat that mistake. And so, here's my little prediction. Bitcoin is the cuddly little gecko of crypto currencies. If they try to stomp on the cuddly little gecko it will start evolving. It will start evading. It will become stealthier. It will grow teeth, and nails. And one day it will become, or something very much like it, or something that simply has the name but none of the original characteristics, will become the Komodo dragon of crypto currencies. And if you try to step on a komodo dragon it will bite your fucking foot off. Now, do we want to play with the cuddly crypto currencies by accepting that in free and open societies the ability of people to transact freely and with privacy should be celebrated as a fundamental human right that protects our freedoms, our democracy, our ability to express ourselves? Or should we be so paralyzed by fear that in order to stop a few bad actors, we engage not only in collective punishment of the innocence, but we then give the levers of totalitarian surveillance to the few who will abuse them. Let the little gecko do its thing. It will bring freedom to the world. It will actually solve many of the problems we have today. That we've created through financial inclusion or exclusion.

48:00 Q: Thanks for the talk Andreas. Basically miners who secure the network in future are going to rely more and more on transaction fees for their award. We also have an indication that probably Bitcoin needs a layer 2 solution like Lightning Network. If a lot of these micro transactions are taken off on a layer 2 solution, what effect could this have on the security of the network with miners getting less reward?

A: That's a great question. So first of all, you've got to understand that this is a natural market-based evolution that is happening in real time. So, the reliance on fees versus the coin-based reward or block subsidy, that calculation of what's more important doesn't happen some point a hundred years in the future. It happens today. It happens every day when miners do a profit and loss calculation in order to decide how much more equipment to deploy, what equipment to turn off, which equipment is no longer profitable, which equipment is now profitable and should be used more aggressively. They allocate their energy commitments based on this profit and loss calculation and the contribution of fees to block subsidy has already reached a 50/50 point at moments of very very high utilization of the network. So this is already happening. When you move transactions to an off-chain network, that has a multiplier effect. And the multiplier effect is not to not have transactions on the base layer. It's simply to say, for every one transaction on the base blockchain, we can do thousands, tens of thousands of transactions, perhaps on the second layer without incurring additional fees. But you still need anchoring transactions to open and close channels. Now increasingly what we're going to see is this hybrid environment where your wallets will choose what to do based on the circumstances, the level of fees, the amounts of payment you want to make. And it will do intelligent routing, just like we do least cost routing in telephony or shortest hop routing on the internet. And your wallet will do that and make decisions about which layer 2 networks to use, because there won't only be one and what ratio of unchain versus off-chain. I'll give in mind. Because of technology called "splicing" or "splice out" you can actually combine within a transaction, almost like a CoinJoin that we talked about before. You can have some inputs in the transaction be on chain redemption of coins that you have on chain, and some of the inputs be channel closing inputs of channels that you're closing in order to rebalance your layer to. At the same time on the output side, some of them can be direct on chain payments per house for larger amounts where you want to do it on chain it's more effective, but some of the outputs will be channel opening outputs that open new channels to better balance your activity on layer 2. There will not be one set of transactions for on chain and another set of transactions for opening and closing channels. Those things will happen simultaneously. There'll be plenty of transactions on the network. In fact layer 2 is only the first step in a scaling journey that has to involve hundreds of steps, and infrastructure improvements, and new algorithms and new ways of balancing the essential requirements of security, scalability and decentralization in a way that allows us to bring this universal basic finance technology to everyone. We cannot solve this with one magic bullet. Any more than you can solve the scalability problem on the internet because the moment you solve the current scalability challenge on the internet, it opens the door for every application developer to say: "huh, I think we can do 4k video now" and then you have a new scalability problem. And you solve that because the internet gets completely flooded and nothing works and then as soon as you solve that then there's more capacity the app developers go "VR 4k video" cool and then you have a scalability problem again. And I've been watching that play out since 1989 where I didn't have enough bandwidth for text email and then I did, and that I didn't have enough bandwidth for sending attachments and then I did, but not high resolution images and then I did, so I could do voice calls and then etc etc. This is a continuous development. The engineers in this room will probably understand me when I say: "Of you give me a fiber connection that offers me a hundred gigabit internet to my home", the first thing I do is I call the internet service provider and I say: "Did you really mean that, like a hundred, like can I actually use it?" And like: "We can assure you sir". This has happened to me. It was a one gig connection with fiber. "Yes, we can assure you sir that you can use it. I'm not sure if you understand me correctly. I actually can use it. I'm an engineer. I can use it". And like: "Absolutely sir, no problem at all!" An optimized router and switch later, two virtual servers and I pegged that connection for 12 months at one gig down, one gig up, 24 hours a day. You give me a hundred gig connection? Unlike excellent. The Internet Archive needs a local mirror. Wikipedia should probably be replicated in every language possible on my little server at home. You give me a terabyte connection? I'm like, here we go! 4K VR video for the world! I can do Netflix from my house. Not watch it. Serve it! To everyone! Any engineer who looks at a capacity limit is immediately thinking: "What could I do if it was doubled, tripled, quadrupled?". We think Moore's law. There is no way we can solve blockchain capacity. The moment you solve it, I think "microtransactions". The moment you solve that, I think "Kiko transactions in microseconds". The moment you solve that, I think: "machine to machine payments with Pico transactions in microseconds, happening 24 hours a day on all of the IOT devices. We will always have a scaling problem. What's really interesting to me as a milestone is: "When do we get this scaling to the level where we can start onboarding more and more of the other 6 billion?" And on that note I'm gonna end it today. 

Thank you so much.

